docs: adding new Lambda features (#7917)
awslabs/aws-lambda-powertools-python: docs/lambda-features/managed-instances.md

- **`/tmp` directory is shared** across all processes - use caution with file operations

For more details on the isolation model, see [Lambda Managed Instances documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.

## Powertools integration

Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) works seamlessly with Lambda Managed Instances. All utilities are compatible with the multi-process concurrency model used by Python.

### Logger, Tracer, and Metrics

Core utilities work without any changes. Each process has its own instances, so correlation IDs and traces are naturally isolated per request.

???+ note "VPC connectivity required"
    Lambda Managed Instances run in your VPC. Ensure you have [network connectivity](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances-networking.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} to send logs to CloudWatch, traces to X-Ray, and metrics to CloudWatch.

```python hl_lines="5 6 7 10 11 12 20 25" title="Using Logger, Tracer, and Metrics with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_tracer.py"
```

### Parameters

> Parameters utility works as expected, but be aware that **caching is per-process**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Parameters utility works as expected, but be aware that **caching is per-process**.
```

Author: Fixed.

---
title: Lambda Managed Instances
description: Using Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) with Lambda Managed Instances
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD043 -->

[Lambda Managed Instances](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} enables you to run Lambda functions on Amazon EC2 instances without managing infrastructure. It supports multi-concurrent invocations, EC2 pricing models, and specialized compute options like Graviton4.

## Key differences from Lambda (default)

> | Aspect           | Lambda (default)                            | Lambda Managed Instances                        |

Reviewer 2: Let's use `Lambda On Demand` as default

| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **Concurrency**  | Single invocation per execution environment | Multiple concurrent invocations per environment |
| **Python model** | One process, one request                    | Multiple processes, one request each            |
| **Pricing**      | Per-request duration                        | EC2-based with Savings Plans support            |

> | **Scaling**      | Scale on demand with cold starts            | Async scaling based on CPU, no cold starts      |

Reviewer 2: nit: you can still have cold starts if your request volume exceeds the capacity provided in LMI, no?

| **Isolation**    | Firecracker microVMs                        | Containers on EC2 Nitro                         |

## How Lambda Python runtime handles concurrency

> Unlike Java or Node.js which use threads, the **Lambda Python runtime uses multiple processes** for concurrent requests. Each request runs in a separate process, which provides natural isolation between requests.

Reviewer 2: I think here I'd rather focus on what Python managed runtime does rather than draw a parallel with other languages, if I'm here I'm interested in Python specifically.

This means:

> - **Memory is not shared** between concurrent requests

Reviewer 2: Let's avoid the negation here, if possible at all

- **Global variables** are isolated per process
- **`/tmp` directory is shared** across all processes - use caution with file operations

## Isolation model

Lambda Managed Instances use a different isolation model than Lambda (default):

| Layer                  | Lambda (default)                         | Lambda Managed Instances                   |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| **Instance level**     | Firecracker microVMs on shared AWS fleet | Containers on EC2 Nitro in your account    |
| **Security boundary**  | Execution environment                    | Capacity provider                          |
| **Function isolation** | Strong isolation via microVMs            | Container-based isolation within instances |

**Capacity providers** serve as the security boundary. Functions within the same capacity provider share the underlying EC2 instances. For workloads requiring strong isolation between functions, use separate capacity providers.

> For Python specifically, the multi-process model adds another layer of isolation - each concurrent request runs in its own process with separate memory space.

Reviewer 2: I am unsure about this section, should we link to the LMI docs with a "Go here to learn about the isolation model of LMI"  (or similar) instead?

Previous sections have an immediate impact on the programming model, this is more indirect and a characteristic of LMI that might not belong in the docs of a toolkit like ours.

## Powertools integration

Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) works seamlessly with Lambda Managed Instances. All utilities are compatible with the multi-process concurrency model used by Python.

### Logger

Logger works without any changes. Each process has its own logger instance.

```python hl_lines="4 7" title="Using Logger with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_logger.py"

> ```

Reviewer 2: I find these `<Utility> works without any changes` sections quite repetitive.  Does it make sense to merge at least the core utilities in a single code snippet?

We're already saying above that PT works seamlessly with LMI. We can keep those other sections that require special clarifications (if any).

### Tracer

Tracer works without any changes. X-Ray traces are captured per request.

???+ note "VPC connectivity required"
    Lambda Managed Instances run in your VPC. Ensure you have [network connectivity](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances-networking.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} to send traces to X-Ray.

```python hl_lines="4 8 12" title="Using Tracer with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_tracer.py"
```

### Metrics

Metrics work without any changes. Each process flushes metrics independently.

???+ note "VPC connectivity required"
    Ensure you have [network connectivity](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances-networking.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} to send metrics to CloudWatch.

```python hl_lines="5 9 12" title="Using Metrics with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_metrics.py"
```

### Parameters

> Parameters utility works correctly, but be aware that **cache is per-process**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters utility works as expected, but be aware that **caching is per-process**.
```

```python hl_lines="9" title="Using Parameters with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_parameters.py"
```

???+ tip "Cache behavior"

>     Since each process has its own cache, you might see more calls to SSM/Secrets Manager during initial warm-up. Once each process has cached the value, subsequent requests within that process use the cache.

Reviewer 2: I'm aware this is not a problem we've solved neither here nor in On Demand, but reading this I can't help but think about cache invalidation for parameters, which is now even more apparent with LMI.

I think a sentence about "you can customize the caching behavior with ..." would help here.

### Idempotency

Idempotency works without any changes. It uses DynamoDB for state management, which is external to the process.

```python hl_lines="7 10" title="Using Idempotency with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_idempotency.py"
```

### Batch Processing

Batch Processing works without any changes. Each batch is processed within a single process.

```python hl_lines="5 8 14" title="Using Batch Processing with Managed Instances"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/using_batch.py"
```

???+ note "Other utilities"

>     All other Powertools for AWS utilities (Feature Flags, Validation, Parser, Data Masking, etc.) work without any changes. If you encounter any issues, please [open an issue](https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-python/issues/new?template=bug_report.yml){target="_blank"}.

Reviewer 3: All other Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) utilities ...

Reviewer 2: We've already said this at L46:

> Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) works seamlessly with Lambda Managed Instances. All utilities are compatible with the multi-process concurrency model used by Python.

I would remove this "Other utilities" section and just leave the "if you find any issues..." callout.

## Working with shared resources

### The `/tmp` directory

The `/tmp` directory is **shared across all processes** in the execution environment. Use caution when writing files.

```python title="Safe file handling with unique names"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/tmp_file_handling.py"
```

### Database connections

Since each process is independent, connection pooling behaves differently than in threaded runtimes.

```python title="Database connections per process"
--8<-- "examples/lambda_features/managed_instances/src/database_connections.py"

> ```

Reviewer 2: Similar to the isolation model section, unsure if this should be in our docs.

We've already mentioned above that these are differences in the programming model, this doesn't have a direct impact on Powertools since we don't use the `/tmp` folder but it's more of a general LMI characteristic, and we need to draw the line somewhere.

Other sections like VPC connectivity instead make a lot of sense.

## VPC connectivity

Lambda Managed Instances require VPC configuration for:

- Sending logs to CloudWatch Logs
- Sending traces to X-Ray
- Accessing AWS services (SSM, Secrets Manager, DynamoDB, etc.)

Configure connectivity using one of these options:

1. **VPC Endpoints** - Private connectivity without internet access
2. **NAT Gateway** - Internet access from private subnets

> 3. **Public subnet with Internet Gateway** - Direct internet access

Reviewer: Another option is an egress only IPv6 internet gateway: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/userguide/egress-only-internet-gateway.html

See [Networking for Lambda Managed Instances](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-managed-instances-networking.html){target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} for detailed setup instructions.

## FAQ

### Does Powertools for AWS Lambda (Python) work with Lambda Managed Instances?

Yes, all Powertools for AWS utilities work seamlessly with Lambda Managed Instances. The multi-process model in Python provides natural isolation between concurrent requests.

### Is my code thread-safe?

> For Python, you don't need to worry about thread safety because Lambda Managed Instances uses **multiple processes**, not threads. Each request runs in its own process with isolated memory.

Reviewer 2: I see what you're going for with this Q/A, but I think the answer can be improved.

I'd leave something like:
> Lambda Managed Instances uses **multiple processes**, instead of threads. Each request runs in its own process with isolated memory. If you implement multi-threading you're responsible for it

or something similar.

### Why is my cache not shared between requests?

Each process maintains its own cache (for Parameters, Feature Flags, etc.). This is expected behavior. The cache will warm up independently per process, which may result in slightly more calls to backend services during initial warm-up.

### Can I use global variables?

Yes, but remember they are **per-process**, not shared across concurrent requests. This is actually safer than shared state.

### How should I handle files in `/tmp`?

Use unique file names (include request ID or UUID) to avoid conflicts between concurrent requests. Always clean up files after use to avoid filling the shared `/tmp` directory.

### Do I need to change my existing Powertools for AWS code?

> No changes are required. Your existing code will work as-is with Lambda Managed Instances.

Reviewer 2: I'd call out that they should upgrade to at least version 3.x.x of Powertools for this statement to be true.
